---
title: "FlatMonitor: An Experiment in Spec-Driven Development"
date: 2026-05-11
draft: false
---

I want to share what I learned from a recent passion project that was meant to serve multiple goals. While there are [a whole lot of open source uptime monitoring tools](https://github.com/Enapiuz/awesome-monitoring) out there already, I didn't find one that was a great fit for my use case, and knew I would learn a lot from building my own. At the same time I thought this would be a great opportunity to explore the concept of spec driven development (SDD) that I've been hearing so much about recently.

**The TLDR:**
- [FlatMonitor](https://github.com/BrianZbr/flatmonitor)is a response to the limitations of Uptime Kuma's reliance on a database for both configuration and data storage.
- This projecct was coded almost entirely by free AI models included with Windsurf, using a combination of spec-driven development (SDD) with test-driven development (TDD).
- A spec helps keep LLM agents on track, but it cannot replace human iteration. 

For web service monitoring on personal projects, I'd been using [Uptime Kuma](https://github.com/louislam/uptime-kuma) for a while. It is a very nice tool for easily displaying a dashboard of availability timelines with many features. It is a relatively mature and highly popular option, and I love that it's so easy to deploy and configure. A small drawback I found, however, is that it lacks separations of concerns in some key respects:

- First, the user-specific configuration and the data that Kuma collects are both kept in the same SQLite database, which can quickly grow to hundreds of MBs in size. This is not unreasonable design, but because the configuration export feature is no longer supported, you effectively have to copy the whole database in order to back up the config.
- Second, the monitoring, data collection and display of the dashboard all depend on a single service. When deployed on a lightweight server, I find it reliable at low levels of traffic, but prone to crashing if the dashboard is getting a high load of views. Because it's one monolithic service, that means the dashboard itself goes offline.
- Finally if you want to analyze your uptime data, it's not that convenient to export from the database.

So I decided to make yet another tool—not only to solve the problems just described, but also to explore the practice of spec-driven development. While it seems the SDD concept has been around for [at least a couple of decades](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-24853-8_12), I've been seeing it widely referenced in recent months as an evolutionary step in how we can move beyond "vibe-coding" when using LLM agents for rapid development. **Put very simply, SDD is the practice of putting a detailed specification document at the center of the planning and implementation of an engineering project.** Based on my personal experiences with vibe-coding, the relevance immediately made intuitive sense to me. It's easy for agents to go off the rails, or to lose track of what was decided and how over the course of multiple chat sessions. Preparing a spec allows for better planning, and maintaining it improves context management. I could therefore see how even just quickly vibing out a spec before vibing out the code might get better results. 

Another concept that had immediate appeal to me when I first learned about it was test-driven development (TDD). This was mentioned in the coding bootcamp I completed some years ago, before the widespread use of LLM agents. Back then, I wanted to try it, but never found practical for small personal projects. Writing good tests manually is hard enough when you have your code and know what you want it to do. Even with agents which are great at writing large numbers of tests quickly, you can't really generate the tests without figuring out a lot of other things first. **So in planning and implementing what I came to call [FlatMonitor](https://github.com/BrianZbr/flatmonitor), I decided both to start with a spec and to put a strong emphasis on testing to see if this combination of SDD and TDD would go more smoothly than my previous experiences with vibe coding.** Overall, I'd say this was a success so far, with only a few small surprises along the way.
## How it went

I came in to this with no experience with SDD, or even with writing up a detailed spec. I found that [there are many frameworks](https://medium.com/@visrow/spec-driven-development-is-eating-software-engineering-a-map-of-30-agentic-coding-frameworks-6ac0b5e2b484) for managing agents to implement a specification, but I decided not to invest in learning any of these yet for such a relatively simple project. Instead I set out to craft the specification as best I could and use that as part of my initial prompt to build out the prototype. To keep financial costs to zero, I used the free tiers of more advanced models for most of the initial spec work, but did the coding with Kimi in Windsurf.

I began generating my spec by simply explaining my use case and general ideas of what I wanted to build. After a few iterations I had [an initial specification](https://gist.github.com/BrianZbr/9e36abecafbb5ba2a298b0e959c98956), barely more than 100 lines of Markdown. This document has many details that I wouldn't have normally taken the time to specify in an initial prompt in more basic vibe coding, like the file structure and a range of architectural details. I felt this would be a good start, but I could also tell that many more decisions would need to be made. I wasn't clear enough on what those unknown unknowns would be, so I dove in to prototyping. I asked Kimi to build the app described in the spec, and then to build tests for the code it had written. I had it update the spec to include the testing strategy.

## The iteration loop

I quickly got into a flow of iterating on this for days. I played with the prototype to find bugs or feature ideas, and as I asked the agent to address each item, I reminded it to keep adding relevant tests and to keep updating the spec in tandem with what it was doing. Though I glanced at the code at times, I found that the spec was such a useful window into what the agent was doing; it freed me up to focus on the bigger picture and, most importantly, actually using the prototype hands on. **Incorporating a detailed specification into the process really did seem to keep things on the rails.**
## Can a spec do it all?

After iterating through this process in many short sessions over several weeks, I had a useful product I was very happy with. The updated spec itself had grown in length by a factor of seven. The project has additional documentation now, and over 200 tests. I wondered if the spec itself—with or without the tests and other documents—would generate similar code. I ran several experiments, feeding these collateral artifacts to various agents and asking them to generate the application code.

The results were a bit less deterministic than I expected. Obvious bugs were evident in the resulting rebuilds. I tried a few free models here that I hadn't used in the original build: SWE, MinMax and Big Pickle (yes, that's a real model on OpenCode). None of these did well. Despite the flawed results, I went back to Kimi and made a comparison between the best of these rebuilds and the main version of the code. I found some small bugs this way, and also significant things that were not in the spec, particularly with regard to the visual style and arrangement. For example, I was surprised to see that the rebuilds all displayed a white background instead of black—a small but significant detail I had never considered to check for in the spec. More substantially, it was in doing these comparisons that I found the spec and code were inconsistent in the use of Pydantic. 

**I concluded from this that while a good spec is critical, it's not everything.** At least for small personal projects like this, and perhaps as a less experienced engineer who may overlook a lot of gotchas in the planning stage, I feel it is more useful to iterate quickly than to try to write a perfect specification up front. I will definitely be using specs as part of my workflow in future projects, but they don't guarantee flawless results or make it possible to eliminate constant human involvement in the development process.

If you have any experiences with SDD or with open source monitoring tools, I'd love to hear from you!
